Here's a real scandal to consider.
Did you know that two out of every three guys would experience some for the male
pat ball just by the time they're 35. I knew it for me,
it was more like 25. I wish keeps been around when I was younger,
because advancements in sign have meant that there's now treatments that can
combat the symptoms of hair loss and help you keep the hair that you have.
It's too late for me. My hair is not coming back,
but you don't have to be like me. You can stop your hair loss early.
Thanks to keeps keeps off as generic versions of the only two FDA approved drugs
for treating hair loss.
So you may have tried them before, but never at a price this low that's right.
If you were thinking Simon,
this is some sort of meds and it's gonna be expensive.
Well, you couldn't be more wrong. Keep starts at just $10 a month.
How does it work? Well for one thing,
there's no need to visit a doctor's office.
Just schedule a quick online consult and a bit later a discreet package arrives
at your door and you can use it in the privacy of your own home.
So if you are noticing that you are losing your hair,
that's not a problem that's gonna fix itself,
do something of a so for a limited time,
go to keeps.com or slash biographics,
or click the link of the description below to save 50% of your first order.
And let's get into today's video,
Take a secretary of state, a show girl, and a Soviet spy.
Mix them together in the middle of the cold war.
And you have the recipe for one of the greatest political scandals in British
history. Today, we'll be taking a look at the perfume affair, a love triangle,
which became front page news in every newspaper in Britain during the early
1960s, and helps bring down the conservative government of Harold McMillan.
Let's take a look at the main characters involved in this scandal and see how
their lives brought them together.
We'll start with a male protagonist of the story. John Dennis Profumo,
since the whole thing was named after him,
after all he was born in 1915 in Kensington London,
part of the very rich and influential Profumo family,
which came from Italian N ability based in the kingdom of Sarnia,
even though John never used the title as father Al,
but was the fourth Barron Profumo and had made a fortune in insurance,
owning the lions share of the provide life association of London.
Unsurprisingly,
all the benefits of wealth were afforded to John Profumo from an early age,
starting with his education.
He first went to one of the most expensive and prestigious boarding schools in
England. Afterwards he studied the university of Oxford,
where he had a romantic twist that somewhat foreshadowed his future affair,
which brought him no to rioty.
According to declassified MI five documents during the 1930s,
while still in college Profumo was in a relationship with German model Giselle
vinegar, who was later convicted,
a espionage 1940 was a big year for John Profumo. His father died leaving him,
his Barnet sea and his fortune.
He also had his first taste of political success as he had been elected as a new
member of parliament or MP for Kettering becoming the youngest MP in house
commons.
Profumo had also enlisted in the war and was deployed to Africa in 1940 as part
of the north Hampton. She yary when the war was over,
it seems like Profumo was set up for success. He had the connections,
the popularity,
the support of the conservative party and the war record that could take him
very far. But in 1945,
he suffered a setback when he lost the election to his labor opponents,
without a seat in the house of commons Profumo was given a smaller position as a
delegate to Japan.
So he spent the next few years broad preparing to rebuild his political career.
The 1950s went much better for Profumo during the 1950 general election,
he was put up as a candidate in Stratford,
on Ave than a conservative constitu win.
That was considered a safe bet for him to win, which he did.
And then he became an MP again. Then the following year,
the conservatives took power as Winston Churchill became the new prime minister
of the United Kingdom.
And Profumo began climbing the steps of the political ladder as he was regarded
as one of the promising up and comers of the conservative party.
He various positions mainly for the ministry of S sport and the ministry of
foreign affairs. And in 1960,
he was appointed the new secretary of state for war under prime minister,
Harold McMillan, his private life wasn't too Shay either as in 1954,
Profumo married Valerie Hobson, popular actress of a day,
best known for a rolls in the movies, kind,
hearts and cor S and brighter Frankenstein.
So now let's move over to who art's second protagonist,
Kristin Margaret Keila.
She was born in Oxbridge west London on February the 22nd, 1942.
And her early life was markedly different from that of Profumo.
Her father left the family when Christine was a small girl and she then had to
relocate to the village of rebury with a mother and a new partner who lived in
a pair of converted railway carriages Kela may have been abused when she was
young. It is a bit unclear due to conflicting statements when she was 17,
she became pregnant.
But the father who was an American serviceman returned to America,
Christine was forced to give birth a home in secrets and her son who was
premature died a few days later, unsurprisingly,
Christine Kela life was not a happy one.
And she wanted to spend as little time there as possible.
She soon left school and worked a string of jobs,
including as a waitress and a model. In the late fifties,
she found work at a CD nightclub in Soho called Murray's,
where she was employed as both a hostess and a topless showgirl at the club ki
met and befriended two people who would play important roles in the perfume, a,
the Mandy rice Davies and Stephen Ward rice Davies was a showgirl like
Keila.
While Stephen Ward was a successful osteopath who had a lot of high profile
clients,
such as movie stars and politicians a sure while later Kela had moved him with
ward, although she insisted that their relationship was purely platonic,
more like a brother and sister among Ward's important friends was,
will master the VI count Astor.
And the two were close enough that the Lord even allowed warden is on to rush to
vacation at his country estate called Cliveden.
And this is exactly what warden Kela were doing over the weekend of July,
the eighth, 1961.
They were relaxing by the swimming pool when Lord Astor introduced them to two
new guests, the actresses, Valerie Hobson and her husband war secretary,
John Fumo
Right off the bat.
John Profumo was smithing with the young model who was swimming naked when he
first laid eyes on her.
Stephen Ward on the other hand was more into interested in another one of Lord
ASTA's guests, a Russian diplomat named ye GU Ivanov.
Officially Ivanov was listed as a Naval latae with the Soviet embassy,
but everyone knew is actually a spy working for the G U the Soviet military
intelligence agency ward had been approached by MI five to help them cultivate a
relationship with Ivan a as they hoped he would defected their side.
Their association was a two way street as Ivanov also tried to pump board for
information regarding his high profile clients.
According to one government report,
ward had at least 40 ministers and MP as patients.
So it understands of all how both MI five and the Soviets could see him as a
valuable resource. We don't know whether or not ward ask.
Christine ke have any kinds of Lia on with any of the men at Lord A's party,
but he certainly did not discourage our relationships,
both Profumo and Ivan a met her for the first time on that weekend.
And they both began affairs with us. Soon after now,
we arrive at a contentious point in the story one, which has multiple versions.
And we cannot say with certainty that any of them are completely true or false,
whether on not the love triangle actually enabled the Russians to obtain
sensitive information from Profumo the war secretary always denied it even after
the whole matter was discovered saying that his conversations with Kela were
nothing but pillow talk and an independent inquiry that was conducted confirmed
this. However, a KGP report later obtained by the Americans claims the opposite,
according to one Soviet by who reigns unidentified to this day,
the Russians got a lot of useful information from Profumo courtesy of his
dalliance with Christine Kela the report even asserted that I even of had been
able to bug Profumo apartments. This all came later. However,
once that whole affair had been exposed for now, it was still 1961.
And Christine Kela was involved with a British politician and a Soviet at spy.
Both relationships were just short flings.
John Profumo liaison with Kela lasted anywhere from a few weeks to a few months,
but it was definitely over by the end of the year, even.
So I five became aware of the war secretaries association with Kela and were
concerned enough that they alerted the cabinets. However,
it was too early to raise in the arm bells.
All that happened was a private meeting between John Profumo and the cabinet
secretary, sir, Norman Brook,
who advised Profumo to stay away from ward and his entourage and informed him of
their relationship with Ivan Arvin, how MI five was monitoring the situation.
The war secretary broke off with Christine ke. After that meeting,
he wrote a letter which said, darling,
last something's blown up tomorrow night and I can't therefore make it I'm
terribly sorry.
Especially as I leave the next day for various trips and might be able to see
you again until sometime in September, blast it.
Please take great care of yourself and don't run away.
Love Jay Profumo would come to regret writing this letter because Keila kept it
and later showed it to the tabloids. But for now, at least always, well,
his little thumb was over than he could. Once again,
focus on his political career.
Even if people in the cabinet or MI five suspected him of an affair,
such concerns were kept quiet. The press had not gotten winds of the liaison,
and nobody was looking to make a big scandal out of the whole thing. Elise,
not yet
For the time being,
it looks like Profumo indiscretion would quickly be overlooked and forgotten as
for Kela.
She moved on from a Italians with the war secretary and began a new relationship
with a Jamaican on jazz singer named Allos lucky Gordon.
The musician had actually first met Christine Keeler on August the seventh,
1961. Back when she was still with Profumo in a cafe in nodding hill,
like many other men in her life, he was immediately infatuated with, uh,
so he was eager to comfort her when her affair with the politician was over.
However, their relationship was tempestuous often filled with drug fueled,
violent confrontations,
including one time when Gordon kept Kela hostage for two days and threatened her
with an ax. By the end of 1962, the 20 year old had an enough of the musicians,
temper, um, was just about ready to move on. In September of that year,
she met a music promot and small time hustler from Antiga named Johnny Edgecomb.
And the two soon became lovers, but comb wasn't the quiet, peaceful type either.
And he even got into a fight with lucky Gordon over Kela giving the jazz singer
a cut on his face that required 17 stitches to close.
The fight happens in October,
1962 and Christine Keila left Edgecomb soon after were removed back into Steven
Ward's apartment at 17 wi born news in Malarone comb,
however was not willing to let her go and did inadvertently set in motion.
The events that led to the Profumo scandal on December the 14th,
1962 Edgecomb showed up at Ward's flat looking to speak with Kela.
She wanted nothing to do with him.
So she threw a one pound note for the cab there and told him to leave Edgecomb.
However wouldn't hear of it. So he tried to shoulder barge the apartment door.
When this didn't work,
he pulled out a gun fired six shots into the door and the wall above it.
He left soon afterwards, but was arrested and charged on multiple counts,
including attempted murder taken as an isolated instant.
This would've hardly been front page news. However,
when she was giving her statement to the police, Keila mentioned,
Profumo an Ivan of the cops did not do anything about it since neither men had
anything to do with the crime, but this was how the rumors got started.
There had always been whispers regarding Profumo having an affair,
but nobody pressed the story. Since without the Soviet connection,
it wouldn't have been considered a big deal. In fact, prime minister,
Harold McMillan famously wrote in his diary at, at the outset of the scandal.
I was forced to spend a great deal of today over a silly scrape women this time.
Thank God not boys.
It is true that if the whole thing had only been about an MP, having an affair,
everybody else would've probably also treated it like a minor scrape. However,
Christine Keer seemed ready to share her story with whoever was willing to
listen as it happened to one of those people was a former P named John Lewis who
had met Keila in a nightclub on baker street,
where she told him of her affair with John Fumo Lewis had been a member of the
labor party,
who opposed the conservative Tories with which included Profumo not only that,
but he also had a personal grudge against Steven Ward due to a dispute over a
former lover Lewis relished the opportunity to cause some trouble for the,
to and for ward.
And so he passed on Kela story to a friends and former colleague of his names,
George wig, who was serving as an MP at the time.
And coincidentally had an ax to grind with John Profumo.
The main reason why no newspaper had mentioned the affair up to that point was
because they would most definitely get sued for libel and most likely lose the
case. We benefited from something called parliamentary privilege,
which provides him with legal immunity while carrying out his duty. Therefore,
when he brought up the affair in the house of commons,
he was safe from prosecution because he was doing so in the interest of national
security and definitely not to get revenge on a political enemy.
The case against Profumo unfolded in the house of commons and incremental steps.
A first wig was basically doing it alone and she had not mentioned the war
secretary by name. This is all happen in March, 1963,
around the same time as Johnny Ekins trial,
who was convicted of possessing a firearm with intent to harm and sentenced to
seven years in prison. Christine Keer was supposed to testify in the case,
but she fled the country to avoid doing so,
even though she simply went to Spain on vacation,
this was not known at the time.
So there was talk that the Tories might have corrupted the witness to make the
case go away.
This new development caused more labor MPS to focus on the scandal in I
eventually the entire party was asking the war secretary to give an official
statement on the matter,
after an internal discussion within the conservative party,
John Profumo agreed to do so. And on March of the 23rd,
he appeared before the house of commons and gave his statements where he
basically admitted that he was friends with Kela and that he had met Ivanov
twice. But anything more than that was just pure fabrication.
He said there was no impropriety in my acquaintanceship with miss Kela.
And I've made the statement because of what was said yesterday in the house by
three honorable members whose remarks were protected by privilege.
I have no idea where she is and any suggestion that I was in a connected with or
responsible for our absence from the trial at the old Bailey is who and
completely untrue. I shall not hesitate to issue Ritz for liable and slander.
If scandalous allegations are made or repeated outside this house,
such statements were usually taken at face value.
So the matter was dropped for the time being Profumo was a by Kela war to both
up his story initially,
but this wasn't gonna last long with Profumo N untouchable Steven Ward became
the one most affected by the burgeoning scandal.
He was facing several vice charges,
including forcing Keer and Mandy rice Davies into prostitution and living off
their earnings,
this high profile friends and all abandoned him and his once thriving apathic
practice was now crumbling.
Now a desperate man board wanted the truth to come out,
hoping that it would exonerate him. First.
He tried contacting the prime minister's office,
but was ignored a recently discovered Mamo from the prime minister's personal
secretary suggests that McMillan was aware of wars revel,
but he either didn't believe him or thought his testimony was irrelevant because
he would be arrested soon. It wasn't until ward went to the labor party,
that McMillan was forced to make inquiries regarding his statements. Meanwhile,
Christine Keila also changed her story mainly after Mandy rice Davies alluded to
the press that Profumo might have been more intimate with Kela than he admitted
to the war secretary. He was on holiday in Italy,
went be received word about the new deployments.
At which point he confessed everything to his wife in returned home to face the
music on July the fifth, 1963.
John perfu admitted that he had lied in the house of comments and resigned his
position.
Once Profumo lie had been exposed,
the scandal reached a whole new level due mainly to the fact that newspapers
were no longer under threat of being sued for liable. Now,
the media circus started in earnest as tabloids printed,
every salacious little detail about the affair,
including the letter Profumo had written to Kela.
The conservatives did what they could to minimize the damage to that party.
They distanced themselves from promo obviously,
and placed a lot of the blame on Kela,
who they branded a professional seductres. They also blamed war to,
they described as a trader working for the Soviets.
There were calls for the prime minister to resign, but, but Millin refused.
And in an attempt to diffuse the situation commissioned to hide justice official
named Lord Denning to conduct an and present a report on the affair,
mainly how it concerned the Soviets. The report was published in September,
1963 to great public anticipation and concluded that there had been no security
risk caused by the war secretary's actions, even.
So the scandal had a definitive effect on the public's trust in the conservative
party. Harold McMillan eventually resigned as prime minister during October,
1963, citing health concerns. He did need to have an operation,
but scholars and political figures of Pines that the medical procedure was not
serious enough to prevent him from doing his duties.
And that McMillan used it as a convenient excuse to say face before the perfume
earth McMillan was known as super Mac in the British press and his party had
easily won the previous selection and gained 20 seats in parliament,
the 1964 general election, however,
revealed the Tores giant drop in popularity as they lost 61 seats and the labor
party under Harold Wilson, hummed control of the government.
As for the people directly involved in the scandal,
they all suffered to some degree, but none more so than Steven Ward,
the osteopath who was branded by the government to somehow being the one
responsible over the whole affair.
Min acts described retroactively as political revenge and a blatant miscarriage
of justice with his life in ruins wards,
took an overdose of bobs and fell into a coma.
He was found guilty and absentee of living off imoral learnings,
but he died a few days later. Yeah,
I an a return time to the Soviet union in December,
1962 months before the scandal broke.
And to the true extent of his role in the matter remains unclear to this day,
Mandy rice Davies was coerced to testifying ward trial by Scotland yard
inspector who arrested her on a bogus theft charge center to Holloway prison
until she relented allegedly during her testimony,
she had her own little moment of fame while being questioned over a sexual
encounter. She claimed to have had with Lord ask her awards departments.
When the opening council informed rabies that asked her Deni this,
she gave them a memorable reply. Well, he would wouldn't he,
Christine Keer tried making the most of her newfound fame and she became ever
more infamous after posing naked in,
in a photo shoot for a celebrity photographer Lewis Morley in December, 1963,
she was found guilty of perjury and sentenced to nine months in prison,
but served only half when she got out, she sold her story to the newspapers.
But by then interest in the perfume affair was starting to wa Keila mainly
stayed at the spotlight once the whole thing blew over.
Although she did write several books on the subject in the decades that followed
oftentimes is containing new revelations about the perfume affair that had never
been corroborated.
She married twice divorced twice and had two children before dying on December
4th, 2017 at the age of 75,
John perfume's political career went up in flames following the scandals,
but he embarked on a road of redemption.
He began working at a charity named toy B hall,
which focused on hoish areas of London eventually becoming the chairman of the
board of trustees, his wife, Valerie Hobson, stuck by his sign,
through the whole scandal and joined him in his charitable work.
The two of them devoted themselves to this charity until their deaths in 1975,
perfume received a CBE from queen Elizabeth II or commander of the order of the
British empire, recognizing his charitable efforts.
This was a clear sign that he was longer regarded as a political prior.
He probably could have resumed his career if he wanted to,
but Profumo preferred to work at Twain B hall,
which he did until his death on March the ninth, 2006.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did, please do that.
Thumbs up button below. Don't forget a subscribe. Please do check out.
Today's sponsor keeps link below and thank you for watching.